From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the Daily.
>> Now to election night in the high stakes
races marking the first electoral test
[music] of President Trump's second
term.
>> We can now make a major projection.
>> In Virginia, Democrat Abigail Spamberger
will be the first woman to serve as
governor.
>> Mike Cheryl is the next governor of New
Jersey, defeating Jack Cherelli. CNN
projects that Democratic socialist Zoran
Mdani, the Democratic candidate, will be
elected [music] the next mayor of New
York, New York.
>> Last night, [music] in the first big
elections of the new Trump era,
Democrats won. In New Jersey,
>> man, with this vote, you guys should
scream from the rooftop.
Virginia,
>> we sent a message to the whole world
that in 2025,
Virginia chose pragmatism
over partisanship.
[cheering]
>> And New York City,
>> New York, tonight you have delivered
a mandate for [music] change
>> and up and down the ballot across the
country. So, Donald Trump, since I know
you're watching,
I have four words for you.
Turn the volume up.
Today, national political correspondent
Shane Goldmaker explains what these
elections tell us about how voters feel
about Trump and whether Democrats have
finally found their footing.
It's [music] Wednesday, November 5th.
Did you choose blue M&M's?
>> No, it just like came out. There was
extra blue.
>> That's It's very I mean
>> on brand.
>> You did a good job. Okay, so Shane, New
York City, Virginia, New Jersey, the
Democrats won maybe on one level. Not
that surprising. These were all blue
states, blue city. But the races were
called pretty early. We are talking
before midnight.
>> Well before midnight.
>> Well before midnight. I honestly was
hoping to have a little more late night
pizza. We did both have cupcakes, so
we're ready to go. [gasps]
The big question going into this
off-year election was would voters
soften on Trump from just a year ago.
This is the first temperature check on
how voters are feeling about the
president one year in after everything
he's done in office. The other question
was how would the Democrats perform? So
what do these results tell us?
>> I think that there's almost nowhere on
the ballot that you can look this year
that there isn't good news for the
Democratic party. You can look at the
top of the ticket where there's
governor's races in Virginia and New
Jersey where the Democrats are not just
winning but winning pretty big. You can
look at the ballot measure in California
to redraw five congressional districts
that that's winning overwhelmingly right
now. You can look at the Pennsylvania
Supreme Court. You can look really,
really far down the ballot in Georgia
where there's a public utilities
commission election where Democrats are
are ahead really all up and down the
map. The House of Delegates in Virginia,
Democrats are winning almost everywhere
right now.
>> So, this was a good night for Democrats,
bad night for Republicans and Trump
himself. It was also a good night for
Democratic socialists too, right?
>> Yeah. I mean, I think one of the biggest
names to win is Zoron Mdani here in New
York City. And look, it wasn't a
surprise that he won this election,
right? He won the primary. Uh he's been
the front runner in the polls. But if
you would asked me in January who was
going to win this November, Mani was not
on my or almost anyone's radar. No, he
wasn't on the map.
>> Yeah. He was at 1% virtual unknown
assembly member in New York in a city
where nobody knows any of the assembly
members frankly and you know built a
campaign that built a huge following and
obviously is now the mayor elect as a
34year-old democratic socialist.
>> Yeah. And I think that gets at this
second and maybe bigger question around
these races which has been what kind of
vision were the Democrats going to put
forward here? Would the Democrats coales
around a coherent version of themselves
that presented a path for the future?
And what's interesting about tonight is
that we saw two very different versions
of Democrats win.
>> I mean, I think we saw two divergent
pathways in Mikey Cheryl, who's now the
governor- elect of New Jersey, and
Abigail Spanberger, the governor-elect
of Virginia. moderate women with
national security credentials,
centrists, aim for the middle of the
political electorate,
>> right?
>> And then you have in New York City a
Democratic socialist who inspired
thousands of people to big rallies and
juiced turnout in the city to basically
double more than double the last mayor's
race just four years ago. just to kind
of linger for a moment on the fact of
Mamani's [snorts]
victory, the extent of it, the breadth
of it, it's fair to say that he did
something remarkable even in a place
like New York City, progressive New York
City. We're getting a pretty clear
sense, as you said, that the turnout was
historic. Over 2 million people turned
out. More than a million of those voted
for a democratic socialist in the
capital of capitalism. I think it's a
huge election. I think it tells you a
lot about where the Democratic Party is
today, right? The Democratic Party today
is unhappy with the Democratic
establishment, right? And so, yes, in
these states like Virginia and New
Jersey, they picked sort of more
traditional candidates, people who'
first won in the 2018 midterms. But in
New York, they they took a a flyer a
flyer on somebody totally different
who's speaking almost a different
language of expansiveness in his agenda.
Right? You know, there's a real
frustration in the year since Trump won
from Democratic voters with the
Democratic party. And I think that his
rise represents that. You know, it
really is that that encapsulation of
what I think we're going to see all
across the country next year, which is a
fight between the old guard of the
Democratic Party, age and otherwise, and
a frustrated new guard that wants to
push the party to take bigger and
broader positions on issues.
>> So, let's dig in to how Mamani did it,
how he pulled this off. You're starting
to talk about it a little bit, and we've
we've covered this quite a bit on the
show. He was a candidate who almost
relentlessly focused on these
affordability issues, free buses, rent
freezes, free child care. That was
clearly a very potent message. And I'm
curious, how much of his victory do you
think is that message in and of itself?
or if it's that message plus everything
else that comes with this candidate,
which is someone who's a very capable
messenger who can deliver that message.
>> I mean, it's so hard to tell because,
right, it's hard to separate the
candidate from the message and the
messenger from the message, right? We
all know the three things that he's
standing for because they delivered it
so well and so repeatedly, right? Many
candidates don't have
>> that kind of message. discipline, but
then they might not also have a message
that's quite as expansive and memorable.
Right? Mikey Cheryl running in New
Jersey has promised repeatedly to
declare on day one a state of emergency
for utility bills. That was a winning
message, right? The utilities bills have
been going up in New Jersey. This is
something that sounds clearly like a
poll tested winner. Voters are
frustrated about that. Does that sound
like the kind of thing that she dreamt
her whole life of running for governor
to declare a day one emergency on
utility bills? Like probably not. Right.
Right. Right. It also doesn't quite roll
off the tongue like freeze the rent, you
know?
>> Not quite freeze the rent and not not
quite free childare, right? That's not
going to change the complexion
fundamentally of New Jersey as a place
to live,
>> right?
>> The things that mom Donnie is talking
about could, right? They are hard. He's
unlikely to get that full agenda very
quickly, right? But it's the idea that
he came up with something
transformational that I think that has
drawn so much attention to his candidacy
and made him sort of a unique figure
right now.
>> And he was also very much a kind of
representative of this deeply
progressive wing of the Democratic
party. I mean, just thinking about his
message on Gaza and his pro Palestine
stance that he did not compromise on,
even though, you know, there were Jewish
New Yorkers who were alienated by it.
>> I mean, this this felt like the table
stakes of his candidacy in the primary,
it wasn't the emphasis of his campaign,
certainly in the general election. I
think he did make a big pivot to reach
out to the Jewish community and to
Jewish voters, especially as Andrew
Cuomo hammered him on this issue. So, it
wasn't that he ever shied away from the
topic, but I think it was less his focus
and more the basis of of his campaign at
the very beginning.
>> You're saying he didn't make that the
centerpiece of his campaign. And
neither, right, was a message about
Trump being a threat to democracy. It
was these economic concerns that he just
kept hammering on the cost of living
issues that really resonated
>> every single day. That was that was his
focus.
>> You mentioned Shane that Mamani had
something like 90,000 volunteers. Our
our colleagues have reported that his
campaign became like an antidote to
loneliness for the Gen Z, you know,
volunteers who were involved and they
came out, they canvased for him. They
made friends. They explored this city.
They touched grass. They got out there.
Like his personality, that charisma, it
obviously genuinely inspired people.
Maybe people who had never been invested
in politics before. And I'm I'm
wondering how much weight we should give
that.
>> I mean, I think you should give that a
lot of weight, right? I think that, you
know, we reported over the weekend that
former President Obama called Mam Donnie
ahead of the election and spoke to him,
offered to be a sounding board for him
and basically praised the campaign he
had just run so far. And people have
been drawing parallels between these two
men who have brought hope to Democratic
voters at a time where they feel pretty
bleak and dark. And there's a whole lot
of Obama veterans and alumni who have
said, "Hey, this is the first time I've
actually seen somebody else who's
inspiring hope like that."
>> And there's a lot of responsibility for
that. New York's big and complicated,
and he's 34 years old, has managed a
very small staff as a member of the
legislature, a fairly large campaign
team, but this is a daunting thing, and
he has to fulfill the hope and promises
that people have put. Otherwise, this
ultimately is going to be a struggle for
the left. He's become this really
important figure for the left of the
Democratic party. Not just his victory,
but can he actually accomplish things?
And then even if he is right able to
have success in New York City, I think
there's a question about whether you can
be this kind of Democrat and put
together a winning coalition, not just
in New York City, but at the state
level, you know, at the purple state
level in swing state America.
What can you say about that?
>> I mean, I don't think we can say much of
anything about that yet because they
haven't tried. This is why he's plowing
new ground. This is why it's a historic
candidacy, right? A democratic socialist
running a city of 8 million people is
new, right? New York City is bigger than
a whole bunch of states in the country.
And so, no, we don't know whether it's
politically viable, but that's the whole
idea of the project, right? Which is if
you are successful,
then there will be people who will
emulate you. And if you're not, there
will be fewer people. So then what is
the lesson do you think that Democrats
take from Mani's win at the end of the
day?
>> I mean talking about Mum Donnie with
Democrats has been a total roarshock
test in recent weeks. The centrist and
moderates look at his candidacy and say
like he had an enviable message
discipline on the issues of
affordability and that can work
everywhere. that that focus on the cost
of living is exactly right, exactly what
the party needs to be doing to win in
2026 all over the country, red states
and purple states and blue states. And
you talk to people on the left and they
say, "Sure, he had a focus, but that's
not what made him a success. What made
him a success was the scope of the
solutions that he was proposing to the
problem
>> that he was meeting people with their
level of frustration with the system
that he was saying is broken that we
need such big solutions because the
system has stopped working. It's
illequipped to handle your problems and
that that is the secret to his appeal.
>> Right? It's not just that he was
diagnosing the problems correctly. It's
that he was offering people policy
solutions that were bold enough that
they could get behind.
>> Absolutely. That that is what the people
around him would say is the actual
secret
>> to his appeal.
And of course, his election is only one
piece of the puzzle that we got tonight
because there were places in bluish
purple states with big races and you had
Democrats win there too with a totally
different set of solutions that they
were proposing.
>> Right? So bottom [music] line at this
moment in New York City, this is a big
loss for the moderate centrist Democrat.
But in Virginia and New Jersey, moderate
Democrats won handily. [music] So, how
do we understand that? After the break.
[music]
Shane, for the purposes of understanding
what the lessons are here in these races
for Democrats about what kind of
Democrat can win with what message and
how, tell me about how these two women
won their races for governor. How'd they
pull it off? Let me start with two
words, Donald Trump, and then give you
some specifics in each state, which is
there's probably no state that has been
more impacted by Trump and his cuts to
the federal government than Virginia.
>> And that is where Abigail Spanberger
won. And one of the issues she
campaigned on, she was running against a
Republican opponent who never won
Trump's endorsement. And yet she's still
relentlessly tied that Republican
candidate to Trump, holding her to
account for his cutbacks from Doge in
the Elon Musk era to the recent cutbacks
during the federal shutdown.
At the same time in New Jersey, Mikey
Cheryl similarly ran against a candidate
who she relentlessly tied to Donald
Trump and then got a big boost during
this recent federal government shutdown
when Trump threatened New Jersey and
specifically the tunnel. It's known as
the Gateway Tunnel that connects New
Jersey to New York. This new artery that
they're going to build to help with
traffic, a huge infrastructure project.
He said, "I'm cutting off that funding."
And the Republican candidate wouldn't
criticize him for it.
>> And she pounced all over that issue. And
so it wasn't just Trump, it was Trump
specifically in these places and finding
a way to say, "You need to elect a
Democrat because I will push back on a
president who doesn't have your interest
at heart." This idea of running against
Trump, this is something Democrats have
been criticized for, right? The idea
that, you know, you have to have some
more identity and vision than just being
against Trump. But in this case, it
sounds like it was a very potent message
in these places.
>> I mean, I think the answer is that if it
ain't broke, don't fix it. And in these
cases and in these states at this
moment, running against Trump was the
easiest, simplest, and best way to go
about it,
>> right? You can win doing this. So, when
you dig into the demographics of all
these results in New York City, in
Virginia, and in New Jersey, what do
they tell us? Like can you say anything
meaningful yet about how specific
populations voted? How that's different
maybe from how they voted last year? You
said Democrats did better than in 2024.
So who shifted? If you want to compare
the results tonight to the results a
year ago in basically every single
county in both New Jersey and Virginia,
the Democratic Party is doing better.
What does that tell you? It tells you
that there is a movement away from the
president. That's not just one
demographic group, but all the
demographic groups, right? That's sort
of what you saw a year ago in the other
direction. All those red arrows across
the whole country.
>> You're seeing blue arrows across all of
these counties. Now, it's only two
states, but you're seeing it in the red
corners of Virginia and the blue corners
of Virginia. The red pockets of New
Jersey and the blue pockets of New
Jersey.
>> Across the board. across the board, the
Democrats are improving how they did
from a year ago.
>> So, in the last election, President
Trump made these huge gains among Latino
voters. And now there have been
questions, as you know, as you've been
covering, about whether fear over ICE
raids might keep them home, whether
anger over ICE raids and tactics might
motivate them to go to the polls. This
is a hugely critical voting block in New
Jersey, for example.
Can we say anything about what this
election told us about shifts within
that community about whether they are
moving to the right for good or maybe
not? So, I spent some time in parts of
New Jersey with big Latino populations
and that's one of my central questions
going into this election. And one of the
places I went is Paya County, which is a
place that has shifted three times
consecutively in Trump's direction and
that Trump actually won narrowly last
year.
>> This is one of the counties you
discussed with us on the show.
>> Yeah. This is this is a diverse county
just outside of New York City and with
more than 95% of the vote in Mikey
Cheryl is winning that county by 15
percentage points.
>> And so
>> what do you make of that?
>> I can't tell you which demographic
groups cuz there's little towns within
the county that are more diverse and
less diverse. What it does tell you is
that these places that have diverse
populations have not continuously
permanently shifted to the right. Okay,
I want to ask broadly about the lessons
that Trump and the Republicans might
take from these races. We've talked a
lot about the Democrats.
Yes, these are blue states where
Democrats were favored to win, but as
you've explained, these results seem to
show that the cost of living issues and
concerns are really reaching a broad
swath of people. It's something a lot of
people care about. people who've voted
for Trump. So, how worried should Trump
and the Republicans be?
>> I mean, I think that there's not really
a way to read the election results and
the polls that have led up to them as
anything other than a warning shot for
the Republican party that Trump's
promises to fix the economy, to slow
inflation, to lower prices, that voters
are going to hold him to those promises.
And polls, not just in these states, but
nationally leading up to this have shown
that voters are increasingly mistrustful
that Trump is actually focused on those
issues. Really bad numbers in recent
surveys from NBC and CNN and other
pollsters that show somewhere around 30%
of voters are really satisfied with
Trump's efforts on these issues. And
historically, the economy has been an
area of strength for Trump. Ever since
he emerged on the political scene as the
former host of The Apprentice, people
had seen him for years as a decisive
businessman and trusted that he had a
good sense of the economy, right? And
this is what he ran on.
>> But it's not the only thing he's focused
on, right? I've talked to Democrats in
the last week who have been just sort of
almost over the moon with Trump's
inability to focus on this issue. and
instead his pursuit of a new ballroom at
the White House and raising the East
Wing, posting photos of the the
remodeled Lincoln bathroom in the White
House, hosting a Gatsby-esque party at
Mara Lago just before benefits are going
to be suspended because the government
shutdown that he's not focused on these
sort of breadandbut issues that brought
so many voters to him a year ago. And so
now you have Democratic candidates who
won in these states focusing on
affordability issues.
>> Trump and his management of the economy
were quite a drag for Republicans in
these races, which is really interesting
because the president just posted on
Truth Social kind of the opposite
message. She said, and I'm quoting,
"Trump wasn't on the ballot and shutdown
were the two reasons that Republicans
lost elections tonight." What you're
saying is actually he was on the ballot
and it wasn't good for Republicans. This
is a fundamental challenge for the
Republican party in the Trump era, which
is that there's a whole set of voters
who have only come out for Donald Trump.
and can other Republicans go get them
out? Or is Trump's presence on the
political scene only helping Democrats
unless he's the one you actually get to
cast your ballot for?
>> This is one of the questions I had going
into this election. We knew that was the
case in term one, right? Republicans
lost down ballot races pretty regularly
in his first term. This is the first
test in term two. And the stakes are
ultimately next year who will control
Congress and whether Trump's second term
will include complete Republican control
for four years or only two years. Okay,
just to return to the other part of that
truth social post, he says that one of
the reasons that Republicans lost is
because of the shutdown. And that does
make it seem as though he thinks
Republicans are getting blamed for the
shutdown. I'm wondering if you think
that's the case and if so whether that's
going to affect the negotiations over
the shutdown.
>> It certainly appears to be the case on a
plain reading of this posting. That
said,
I gave up a long time ago about fully
interpreting the plain meaning of
Trump's postings.
>> Yes, a fool's errand. But I do think
that there's no question that the
results tonight are going to impact the
negotiations about when and how to end
the shutdown. And I think that's going
to start tomorrow when Trump is already
scheduled to meet with Republican
lawmakers who he appears to be blaming
at least a bit for the defeats tonight.
Because if there's one thing we know
about paying attention to Donald Trump
and election losses is that he never
thinks it's actually his fault.
>> Can you just say more about how the
races themselves might impact the
negotiations over the shutdown? Because
there is a world in which you could see
Democrats saying, "Okay, look, we did
what we needed to do. We won. People are
angry over the shutdown. Time to end
this thing. You know, pack it up. We got
what we needed."
>> Yeah. I think that that's one world.
There's another world where they dig in
and think they have more leverage and
they see this post and they think we
need to make sure we extract very
specific concessions, not just a vote,
but a policy outcome. You know, one of
the most remarkable things about
tracking what is now the longest
shutdown in federal government history
is how little negotiations have been
happening. It's really only in recent
days where we've started to hear
flurries of conversations, but for the
most part, the two sides haven't even
been talking to each other.
>> Shane, we started this conversation
talking about what these races told us
about whether Democrats had actually
coalesed around a vision after this
really painful election year in 2024.
And while these races were really
different and these candidates were
different, there were two kind of
different pathways here, a moderate and
a much more progressive profile. It does
sound like in general Democrats have
actually begun to coalesce around a
single message that they think is
winning and that one on this night and
that's affordability. that is hammering
these cost of living issues. Whether you
do it from the Mandani perspective with
these very resonant policies that people
got excited about in New York or whether
you do that in a kind of more moderate
way in New Jersey and Virginia, it's
hammering Trump on the thing that people
care about the most in elections, which
is the economy.
>> I would put it this way.
People were unhappy about the economy a
year ago and they blamed Democrats.
People are unhappy about the economy now
and they're blaming Republicans.
This is the difference about being the
party in power. And so if you're
Democrat, step one is being the
opposition party and blaming them for
things that they're unhappy about. And
the number one thing people are unhappy
about and have been unhappy about is
economic issues. And polls show and the
results of this election suggest that
the amount of rope that they're willing
to give the Republicans on this issue is
running out.
That said, it might be enough to oppose
Trump on economic matters to win the
House in 2026, but there are bigger fish
to fry if they really want to take back
power. To win the Senate, you're going
to have to win states where Trump is
still pretty popular. And you're going
to have to come up with a bigger and
broader message. And eventually, if you
want to win the presidency in 2028,
you're going to need a message of your
own. And maybe it's some combination of
the inspiration from mom Donnie and the
moderation from Spanberger and Cheryl.
We don't know what that looks like yet.
And frankly, that's going to be the huge
fight of the Democratic Party in the
coming years. [music] But what we know
right now is that after a year of being
on the mat, the Democratic Party has
been desperate for a fight. And I think
the elections on Tuesday are the first
real punch that they've landed in that
fight.
>> [music]
>> Thank you so much, Shane. Thank you.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you should know today.
Dick Cheney, who was widely regarded as
the most powerful vice president in
[music] American history and a singular
figure in an era of terrorism, war,
[music] and economic change died on
Monday.
As vice president under George W. Bush,
Cheney was a key architect of the
administration's [music] war on terror
in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks. He
helped engineer [music] the passage of
the Patriot Act, which expanded the
government's powers of surveillance, and
he was a dominant voice behind [music]
President Bush's decision to invade Iraq
in 2003, and then [music] to justify
that war. In recent years, Cheney
denounced President [music] Trump,
saying he was a grave threat to American
democracy. And in 2024, Cheney surprised
both parties by announcing [music] that
he would vote for Vice President Kala
Harris in the presidential election.
Today's episode was produced [music] by
Asta Chhaturved, Caitlyn O'Keefe, and
Michael Simon Johnson. [music] It was
edited by Paige Cowitt and Mark George.
contains music by Dan Pal, Pat McCusker,
[music] and Alicia Baub, and was
engineered by Chris Wood.
[music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you tomorrow.